---
pagename: KamaeliaProjectProcesses
last-modified-date: 2008-09-20
page-template: default
page-type: text/markdown
page-status: current|legacy|needsupdate|deprecated|recommended
---
[Kamaelia Project Processes]{style="font-size:21pt;font-weight:600"}

[It\'s not what you do, but the way that you do
it]{style="font-size:16pt"}

This document serves to document the basic processes which will be used
to manage the Kamaelia project going forward beyond April 2006.

This document is a subset of a larger internal document at work, and
covers the aspects that people using Kamaelia may have an interest in.
Specifically it excludes anything that relates to stuff that simply
isn\'t Kamaelia related. This document has been written because the team
is being split across multiple sites, which naturally fits well with
community involvement.

This document is obviously subject to change depending on what we find
works and doesn\'t work. It\'s based on best practice from other
projects and so hopefully should work :-)

So what are we actually doing? See our [Project admin
section](ProjectAdmin.html) for IRC logs, meeting minutes, etc.

[Project Lead]{style="font-size:12pt;font-weight:600"}

The project lead at present is [Michael](/Michael.html), however as far
as possible all project admins are created equal, as are other
developers.

[IRC]{style="font-size:12pt;font-weight:600"}

The team will where practical be present on \#kamaelia on the freenode
IRC network, at least during office hours. Since Kamaelia is an open
source project having a public meeting point is useful. This also allows
for private off channel communications when it is necessary. For
brainstorm discussions it has been noted that there is a need for a
shared whiteboard tool. It is likely that this will take the form of a
simple Kamaelia based system, since Kamaelia is at the stage where this
is now feasible.

For more involved discussions the usual tools of email & the project
bliki will be used (blog combined with wiki).

[Weekly Meetings]{style="font-size:12pt;font-weight:600"}

The project will default to having weekly scheduled meetings at 11:00 am
UK Time (GMT/BST depending on time of year) on the \#kamaelia channel on
the freenode IRC server network. If the friday is a UK bank holiday the
meeting will be on the first working day before the bank holiday. The
agenda for the meeting will be fixed, and as follows:

[Participant check ]{style="font-weight:600"}- this will simply double
check that all expected attendees are there. Whilst the meeting is
primarily for the project team, it is expected, and desired to have
external attendees should they wish.

[Note of the agenda ]{style="font-weight:600"}- As you will see below,
despite a fixed agenda, the agenda does contain discussion items. This
allows for participants in the meeting to be aware of what is up for
discussion in the meeting, and what is not.

[Activity reports -\
]{style="font-weight:600"}This forms 4 sentences (can be long
sentences)\
[These are posted by all participants simultaneously in a deft
demonstration of copy and paste :)]{style="font-style:italic"}

-   DONE - what\'s been done since the last meeting
-   TODO - What I intend to do until the next meeting (not necessarily
    complete before the next meeting)
-   BLOCKED - What is currently blocking someone from working.
-   FOLLOWUP - This sentence is optional, and allows the team member to
    flag something that needs discussing after the meeting which may
    involve confidential information that should not be discussed in a
    public location.

[Discussion items.]{style="font-weight:600"}

[Maximum ]{style="font-weight:600"}4.

[They are to discuss how to proceed with an item, not to discuss the
items themselves. ]{style="font-style:italic"}The default options
available are:

-   Fix \"now\" (yes/no/defer)
-   Assign responsible people and expectations (eg figure out how to do
    X by date Y).
-   Assign group to meet some other time - this will include attendees,
    time and owner. (Time is wooley deliberately) Note this may involve
    waiting for the next face to face meeting to occur or scheduling a
    new one.

Blockages are default to being additional items for discussion

[Check of note of date of next meeting]{style="font-weight:600"} - This
is expected to be the friday at 10:30 the following week. If it\'s
deemed appropriate, the attendees can decide to cancel the meeting the
following week. Unless people are on holiday this process deliberately
forces a meeting at least every 2 weeks, preferably weekly. It is
suggested that if anyone has any BLOCKED items that cancelling a meeting
the next week would be a bad idea.

The meeting is expected to have a fixed length of 30 minutes. If the
number of team members increases, then this may grow to 45 minutes. A
record of the meeting will be captured, but not formally reported (it
may be informally reported).

[This meeting approach has been seen to work for Canonical Ltd, and the
PyPy project (an EU funded project) teams
successfully.]{style="font-style:italic"}

[Face to Face Meetings :
Sprints]{style="font-size:12pt;font-weight:600"}

[Why?]{style="font-weight:600"}

Since the team is distributed, it is desirable to build face to face
meetings into the project management. The primary purposes of these
meetings include (non-exhaustive):

-   Working through particularly awkward issues (code/docs/architecture)
-   Brainstorming purposes
-   Project review
-   Team building

It is expected that if the project has an imbalance of meetings in
particular areas regarding these purposes, that extra meetings will be
added to rectify the imbalance.

[When? ]{style="font-weight:600"}

The participants from the BBC will have internal meetings of this kind
bi-monthly - specifically odd months of the year. The meeting will be
held in the middle of the month, on a Friday, and last 1 full day -
starting at 10:30am. (This is to enable travelling to the location of
the meeting on the day of the meeting)

[Sprints]{style="font-weight:600"}

If there is interest, we will organise public sprints to follow a
similar purpose/pattern. If this happens, then multiday sprints will
generally work backwards through the week. Some projects have a
\"sprinting\" process, which involve multi-day meetings to work on
specific areas of benefit to the project. If these become clearly
desirable, the face to face meetings will grow backwards through the
week for internal meetings (weds, thurs, friday). This is deliberate to
curtail the possible desire to simply \"add another day at the end of
the meeting\". It is expected that there will be 2-3 meetings a year
that take this longer form.

If there is interest in having public sprints, these will be open to
external collaborators. These should fall into the even months of the
year where possible. The format of these will default to the same and
the odd month meetings, but may involve different locations and times.
It is suggested that at least one meeting occur at an open source
conference, such as Europython for this purpose.

[Agenda]{style="font-weight:600"}

The agenda/focus for sprints will be a decided prior to the sprint. How
and where this will be decided will a discussion point for the 2 weekly
meetings prior to the meeting, at the latest. This does not preclude a
\"hot issue\" being dealt with instead.

[Reporting]{style="font-size:12pt;font-weight:600"}

The project proposes to document once a month, at the end of the month,
the following:

-   What\'s been STARTED
-   What\'s IN PROGRESS
-   What\'s been DONE
-   What\'s BEEN BLOCKED and IS BLOCKED, and what the proposed
    approaches for working through those blockages are, and if what the
    approaches were for working through the former were.
-   What other OPTIONS have come up during the month that are being
    considered or noted.
-   These may require discussion as to whether to move forward, or they
    may have been simply discounted. The idea is to document these ideas
    and options.
-   Anything else NOTABLE (might not always be present)

Unless these contain confidential information, these will end up on the
Kamaelia project website [here](/reports).

[Subject to Change]{style="font-size:12pt;font-weight:600"}

The entirety of this document is subject to change if the processes
described are not found to be useful/working.
